(RF) 1. Learners will be able to use both qualitative and quantitative data to present stories about people harmed by legislation targeting specific identities.
(RR) 2. Learners will be able to assess and articulate the limitations of a data set's potential to answer formulated questions. 
(RR) 3. Learners will be able to formulate questions based on available data and extract the data needed to make informed and justified claims.
(RF) 4. Learners will be able to describe fundamental processes for analyzing textual data.
(RF) 5. Learners will be able to storytell through visualization of text analysis with legislative text.
6. Learners will be able to justify the choice between an absolute frequency and a relative frequency when communicating with count data.
(RR) 7. Learners will identify calls to action and empower themselves and others to actively participate in their community.

What does it look like for students to demonstrate this?
1. Learners will be able to use both qualitative and quantitative data to present stories about people harmed by legislation targeting specific identities.
(demonstrating)
- need to include qualitative data in data storytelling (i.e. quotes, excerpts, could extend to art, audio, etc.)
- need to include quantitative data in data storytelling (i.e. probability, prediction, count statistics, plots)
- using prose to present claims from qualitative and quantitative data
(not demonstrating/incomplete)
- no/little qualitative data used
- little context provided for the story
- incomplete justification of claims
- making unfounded assumptions about the people
(NOTE: I think this is a case study question!)

2./3. 
 Learners will be able to assess and articulate the limitations of a data set's potential to answer formulated questions. Learners will be able to formulate questions based on available data and extract the data needed to make informed and justified claims.

Learners can…
Discuss the answers (to which there will be many) to the questions: 
Who or what is missing from the data?
Where are there potentials for inaccuracies in the data?
How is the data biased?
What additional data would be useful in this dataset?
What types of data are present in the data?
	They can provide written or oral commentary on these questions that is understandable to the general public.
Identify potential research questions that can be explored with current data, and articulate why other questions require more or different data.
Create their own questions and answer them given data.
Locate in both data tables and different types visualizations where they can the data needed to answer questions and make claims

 4. Learners will be able to describe fundamental processes for analyzing textual data.
(demonstrating)
Discuss limitations of claims made from text analysis
Apply text analysis to “new” data
Text analysis does not include stop words, is lemmatized

(not demonstrating/incomplete)
Incomplete or absent articulation of limitations
Text analysis includes words that shouldn’t be there

5. Learners will be able to storytell through visualization of text analysis with legislative text.
(demonstrating)
Make a visualization of legislative text that effectively communicates/bolsters a claim

(not demonstrating/incomplete)
Unable to articulate a claim from the text visualization
Articulates a claim but with incomplete justification
Justifies a claim but not in a way that supports it

6. Learners will be able to justify the choice between an absolute frequency and a relative frequency when communicating with count data.
(demonstrating)
Articulates what the numerator and denominator in proportions and probability means: what two groups are being compared?
Determines the difference between absolute and relative frequency
Identifies scenarios when absolute frequency and relative frequency are more appropriate.
(not demonstrating/incomplete)
Making claims that do not account for or discuss absolute vs. relative frequency
Uses absolute frequency when relative is more appropriate (or vice versa)
Does not discuss/articulate how they are using count data

7. Learners will identify calls to action and empower themselves and others to actively participate in their community.

Learners can:
Articulate various ways they may get involved in the community.
Create products in different forms to evoke calls to actions:
Visual: flyers/posters/social media posts
Written: letters/memos/blog posts
Oral: presentations/speeches/conversations
Others: protesting/lobbying/volunteering
Reflect on their past, present, and future contributions to the community.
Work in a team or with others in a collaborative and reflective way.



